TORCH:

Uráka Kirśâsi, makalušauyín, pásūn pási, táz auščîsthai khàušaišyu!

Kátulāthīn-tákïtha tāhâi Hikháusāwi čhistsána huyási, táz báita.

Urtháhamānin khullâ phàram-nuš šî
   Hikháusās čhàlaññās uktāwánśas,
   àlusï àšamnušyupa hïtárāiyanta káuśayišbunnûš yàsi Khiršátayūn
   khwàranūnhupu tsïzáyamnûš áŋmaniš tsátāitai.

Nās-máramnūkwai xurânintar thàllūntai kïthwàrrūntaiyu, táz áurža.



TORCH, DECOMPOSED:

Uráka Kirśâsi, makaluš-auy -ín,    pás -ūn     pási, táz          auščîsthai     khàušaiš     -yu !
NAME  NAME     great  -?   -toward lord-GEN.PL lord  DEF.ACC.SG.N you would see  you listen to-and
Uraka Kirshasi, the great lord of lords, you see and take testimony
[urǎka kirʃáàsi]

Kátulā -thīntá             -kïtha   tāh   -âi     Hikháusāwi čhistsá   -na  huyási , táz          báita       .
battle -being put in place -because leader-DAT.SG NAME       punishment-NEG command  DEF.ACC.SG.N come to know
battle being put in place because the leader Hikhausawi does not command punishment, they are aware
                                             [hikhǎusaawi]

Urtháhamān                 -in  khullâ                phàramnuš šî
summer solstice celebration-to  sacrificial offering  bearing   DST.NOM.SG.F
for the summer solstice celebration sacrificial offering,

   Hikháusās čhàlaññ-ās   uktāw-ánśas,
   NAME      gold   -GEN  8    -
   Hikhausas bears 8 gold,

   àlusï àšamnuš  -yu-pa  hïtár            -āi -yanta  káuśa-yiš -bunnûš yàsi Khiršátayūn
   ale   raw grain-?  and either of the two-?  -within many -?   -pot    also NAME
   ale, and grain, and both in many pots, also Kirshasi

   khwàra -nūnhupu tsïzáyamnûš     áŋman-iš tsátāitai    .
   warrior-        being directed  troop-?  it is donated
   donates troops that they oversee

N-  āsmáramn    -ūkwai xur     -ân -intar  thàllūntai          kïthwàrrūntai           -yu , táz          áurža.
NEG being heeded-      mountain-   -inside they would be sent  they would be sacrificed-and  DEF.ACC.SG.N say
not acknowledged inside the mountain, they would be sent and sacrificed, they say


RUNNING TRANSLATION:

Uraka Kirshasi, the great lord of lords, you see and take testimony
battle being put in place because the leader Hikhausawi does not command punishment, they are aware
for the summer solstice celebration sacrificial offering, Hikhausas bears 8 gold,
   ale, and grain, and both in many pots, also Kirshasi donates troops that they oversee
not acknowledged inside the mountain, they would be sent and sacrificed, they say

(do not use this translation in documentation of relay)
(actual translation is given at the very bottom smh)

Uraka Kirshasi, the great lord of lords, see and take testimony:
The battle is occurring because the leader Hikhausawi does not command punishment
For the summer solstice celebration sacrificial offering, Hikhausas brings 8 gold,
   ale, and grain, in many pots; also Kirshasi should donate troops
Not acknowledged inside the mountain, they would be sent and sacrificed, they say



TO LANG15:

sa  @unáka kinsáasi tɯ  kìmes     -ni      tɯ  mkúto    -ni     , ka  nàne-n   ona teá       -n  -ni
DET NAME   NAME     DET leader:CON-HON.PRF DET large:CON-HON.PRF  EMP look-DIR and understand-DIR-HON.PRF
Unága Ginsáasi the fat leader, look and understand (thusly:)!

tném    -ti      kan opon     kam mit toe   -s  -ta      hɯ  kmèsa -n   sɯ  @hikháusami
lie down-PER.IMP DET conflict SBJ NEG injure-CON-HON.IMP DET leader-DIR DET NAME
The conflict exists because the leader Hikháusawi does not cause injury (they say)

t-  eska -n  -ti      men pesì    -n   sɯ  @hikháusami men in- mettún-a   hií nen-ɯ  
REL carry-DIR-PER.IMP DET festival-DIR DET NAME        DET CIR-gold  -DIR one two-CON
For the festival, Hikháusawi brings eight (pieces of) gold,

   ona hɯ  i-  nmúki       -n   ona hɯ  in- ɯpì -n
   and DET CIR-corn whiskey-DIR and DET CIR-corn-DIR
   corn whiskey, and corn,

   ha    i- kmóso            -<ː> ona ha    i- kmóso            -<ː>
   DET CIR- ceramic container-AUG and DET CIR- ceramic container-AUG
   in many ceramic containers

naa ka  eska -n  -mo      mi  @hikháusami-n   kos ksumo  -<ː>
EXP EMP carry-DIR-NPR.PRF DET NAME       -DIR DET servant-AUG
Also, Hikhausawi should send servants.

kos heté  hɯ  mmusu   -n   ona mitsè    -k      , kam kos se  óhu-s  -ta      nusa
DET stand DET mountain-DIR and be stupid-PER.PRF  SBJ DET PRE die-CON-HON.IMP be in a more prominent position
Because they are in the mountain and are stupid, they will be sacrificed (they say)


LANG15:

sa @unáka kinsáasi tɯ kìmesni tɯ mkútoni, ka nànen ona teánni.
tnémti kan opon, kam mit toesta hɯ kmèsan sɯ @hikháusami.
teskanka men pesì sɯ @hikháusami men inmettúna hií nenɯ
   ona hɯ inmúkin ona hɯ inɯpìn ha ikmósso ona ha ikmósso.
naa ka eskanmo mi @hikháusamin kos ksummo.
kos heté hɯ mmusun ona mitsèk, kam kos se óhusta nusa



TRANSLATION:

Unága Ginsáasi the fat leader, look and understand (thusly:)!
The conflict exists because the leader Hikháusawi does not cause injury (they say).
For the festival, Hikháusawi brings eight (pieces of) gold,
   corn whiskey, and corn, in many ceramic containers
Also, Hikhausawi should send servants.
Because they are in the mountain and are stupid, they will be sacrificed (they say).